README.md, before:

# Setting up a high availability SoHo cluster

***Very much work in progress, but release early and release often . . .***

The goal of this project is to learn Kubernetes and at the end of the day, to have a high availability
mini cluster for SoHo tasks. So the result is not so much directed to a 'Home Lab' but more in the
direction of 'Self Hosting', a blurry line to be sure. But you don't really need HA for a home lab.

Let me get one thing out if the way first: I am only providing this information as a **guide**, use it at your own risk.
I am not responsible for anything that happens to you, your property and especially your data.

I personally run quite a few services at home:

* Personal information management and Home Automation
  * [3rd party applications](Applications.md)
* Infrastructure
  * [Databases, Connectivity, etc.](Infrastructure.md)
* Monitoring
  * [Cluster metrics and application traces](Monitoring.md)
* Development
  * [Image Registry, CI/CD](Development.md)

So I can't afford to have any of them being offline or unavailable. The result is basically a self-hosted private cloud
server.

![Cluster image](images/cluster.png "The cluster")

**I am assuming that anyone attempting this has a good level of technical knowledge, so I'll only be
detailing information relevant to the pitfalls I encountered getting the cluster up and running.**

# Hardware

I am using [3 old small form factor office PCs](Hardware.md) for the cluster.

# Software

I am using **Infrastructure as Code** where ever possible to have a repeatable configuration.

I also use software from the [Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/) (CNCF) projects where ever
possible. Check out the [CNCF Cloud Native Interactive Landscape](https://landscape.cncf.io/) to see what is available. 

With the various pieces of the hardware in place and bootable, time to get the server up and running and start
installing the infrastructure.

1) [Proxmox VE](Proxmox.md)
2) [Git Server](Gitea.md) (LXC)
3) [Creating the virtual machines for the Kubernetes nodes](Terraform.md) (Terrform)
4) [Installing Kubernetes](Kubernetes-Ansible.md) (Ansible)
5) [Bootstrapping the configuration](Flux.md) (Flux CD, Mozilla SOPS)
6) [Cluster services](Services.md) (Cert-Manager, admission controller)
7) [Ingress](Traefik.md) (Traefik)
8) [Cluster storage](Rook.md) (Rook)
9) [Cluster monitoring](Monitoring.md) (Prometheus, Loki and Grafana)
10) [Infrastructure](Infrastructure.md) (Databases, Connectivity, etc.)
11) [Applications](Applications.md) (3rd party applications)
12) [Development](Development.md) (Harbor, Drone, etc.)

Inspiration and references:

All of these creators are an absolute wealth of knowledge and gave me a ton of inspiration to do this project.

* [Jeff Geerling](https://www.youtube.com/@JeffGeerling)
  * [Pi Cluster](https://www.pidramble.com/)
  * [Ansible 101](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=goclfp6a2IQ&list=PL2_OBreMn7FqZkvMYt6ATmgC0KAGGJNAN)
* [Tim Stewart](https://www.youtube.com/@TechnoTim) (Techno Tim)
  * [Proxmox](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GoZaMgEgrHw&list=PL8cwSAAaP9W37Vnxkw6__sshVY-XohWNm)
* [Marcel Dempers](https://www.youtube.com/@MarcelDempers) (That DevOps Guy)
  * [Kubernetes GitOps with Flux](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OFgziggbCOg)
* [Victor Farcic](https://www.youtube.com/@DevOpsToolkit) (DevOps Toolkit)
  * [Kubernetes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Twtbg6LFnAg&list=PLyicRj904Z9-L3XdyttvdPwRngIfGa52Y)
* [Patrick Kennedy](https://www.youtube.com/@ServeTheHomeVideo) (ServeTheHome)
  * [Project TinyMiniMicro](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bx4_QCX_khU&list=PLC53fzn9608B-MT5KvuuHct5MiUDO8IF4)
* [David McKone](https://www.youtube.com/@TechTutorialsDavidMcKone) (Tech Tutorials - David McKone)
  * [How To Create VLANs in Proxmox For a Single NIC](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ljq6wlzn4qo)

**I wholeheartedly und unreservedly, recommend you subscribe to them all!**

# Back up your data!

**Now you are self-hosting, you are the system administrator, so don't forget to back up your data!**

Proxmox allows you to configure snapshots and automated backups, configure and use them.

Don't forget the 3-2-1 rule - **Have a minimum of 3 backups, 2 local on separate devices and 1 offsite!**

---
[Bill Mair](https://github.com/red-lichtie)
[Original document](https://github.com/red-lichtie/homelab-cluster/)

Commit message:

Start of external-dns and coredns integration

README.md, after:

# Setting up a high availability SoHo cluster

***Very much work in progress, but release early and release often . . .***

The goal of this project is to learn Kubernetes and at the end of the day, to have a high availability
mini cluster for SoHo tasks. So the result is not so much directed to a 'Home Lab' but more in the
direction of 'Self Hosting', a blurry line to be sure. But you don't really need HA for a home lab.

Let me get one thing out if the way first: I am only providing this information as a **guide**, use it at your own risk.
I am not responsible for anything that happens to you, your property and especially your data.

I personally run quite a few services at home:

* Personal information management and Home Automation
  * [3rd party applications](Applications.md)
* Infrastructure
  * [Databases, Connectivity, etc.](Infrastructure.md)
* Monitoring
  * [Cluster metrics and application traces](Monitoring.md)
* Development
  * [Image Registry, CI/CD](Development.md)

So I can't afford to have any of them being offline or unavailable. The result is basically a self-hosted private cloud
server.

![Cluster image](images/cluster.png "The cluster")

**I am assuming that anyone attempting this has a good level of technical knowledge, so I'll only be
detailing information relevant to the pitfalls I encountered getting the cluster up and running.**

# Hardware

I am using [3 old small form factor office PCs](Hardware.md) for the cluster.

# Software

I am using **Infrastructure as Code** where ever possible to have a repeatable configuration.

I also use software from the [Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/) (CNCF) projects where ever
possible. Check out the [CNCF Cloud Native Interactive Landscape](https://landscape.cncf.io/) to see what is available. 

With the various pieces of the hardware in place and bootable, time to get the server up and running and start
installing the infrastructure.

1) [Proxmox VE](Proxmox.md)
2) [Git Server](Gitea.md) (LXC)
3) [Creating the virtual machines for the Kubernetes nodes](Terraform.md) (Terrform)
4) [Installing Kubernetes](Kubernetes-Ansible.md) (Ansible)
5) [Bootstrapping the configuration](Flux.md) (Flux CD, Mozilla SOPS)
6) [Cluster services](Services.md) (Cert-Manager, admission controller)
7) [Networking and Ingress](Traefik.md) (Traefik, CoreDNS and external-dns)
8) [Cluster storage](Rook.md) (Rook)
9) [Cluster monitoring](Monitoring.md) (Prometheus, Loki and Grafana)
10) [Infrastructure](Infrastructure.md) (Databases, Connectivity, etc.)
11) [Applications](Applications.md) (3rd party applications)
12) [Development](Development.md) (Harbor, Drone, etc.)

Inspiration and references:

All of these creators are an absolute wealth of knowledge and gave me a ton of inspiration to do this project.

* [Jeff Geerling](https://www.youtube.com/@JeffGeerling)
  * [Pi Cluster](https://www.pidramble.com/)
  * [Ansible 101](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=goclfp6a2IQ&list=PL2_OBreMn7FqZkvMYt6ATmgC0KAGGJNAN)
* [Tim Stewart](https://www.youtube.com/@TechnoTim) (Techno Tim)
  * [Proxmox](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GoZaMgEgrHw&list=PL8cwSAAaP9W37Vnxkw6__sshVY-XohWNm)
* [Marcel Dempers](https://www.youtube.com/@MarcelDempers) (That DevOps Guy)
  * [Kubernetes GitOps with Flux](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OFgziggbCOg)
* [Victor Farcic](https://www.youtube.com/@DevOpsToolkit) (DevOps Toolkit)
  * [Kubernetes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Twtbg6LFnAg&list=PLyicRj904Z9-L3XdyttvdPwRngIfGa52Y)
* [Patrick Kennedy](https://www.youtube.com/@ServeTheHomeVideo) (ServeTheHome)
  * [Project TinyMiniMicro](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bx4_QCX_khU&list=PLC53fzn9608B-MT5KvuuHct5MiUDO8IF4)
* [David McKone](https://www.youtube.com/@TechTutorialsDavidMcKone) (Tech Tutorials - David McKone)
  * [How To Create VLANs in Proxmox For a Single NIC](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ljq6wlzn4qo)

**I wholeheartedly und unreservedly, recommend you subscribe to them all!**

# Back up your data!

**Now you are self-hosting, you are the system administrator, so don't forget to back up your data!**

Proxmox allows you to configure snapshots and automated backups, configure and use them.

Don't forget the 3-2-1 rule - **Have a minimum of 3 backups, 2 local on separate devices and 1 offsite!**

---
[Bill Mair](https://github.com/red-lichtie)
[Original document](https://github.com/red-lichtie/homelab-cluster/)
